Add per-package landing pages and split API docs (#513)
ODINN-SciML/ODINN.jl: docs/src/Packages/gungnir.md

# Gungnir

[`Gungnir`](https://github.com/ODINN-SciML/Gungnir) is a Python preprocessing pipeline that produces the glacier and climate data files consumed by the Julia ODINN ecosystem. It uses [OGGM](https://github.com/OGGM/oggm) to retrieve glacier geometry (DEMs, ice thickness, outlines) from the Randolph Glacier Inventory (RGI), and downloads climate reanalyses (W5E5 or ERA5) to force the mass balance models. The output is written to `~/.ODINN/ODINN_prepro/` as NetCDF files, which `Sleipnir.initialize_glaciers()` reads via `Rasters.jl` at simulation time.

> Unlike the Julia packages in the ecosystem, `Gungnir` is **not** a Julia package — it runs in a Python environment and has no Julia API. It sits at the bottom of the dependency hierarchy: Gungnir → Sleipnir → Muninn/Huginn → ODINN.

Reviewer: Replace by: 'Gungnir` is the only package in the ODINN ecosystem writen and executed in Python.  

More direct and compact

> Unlike the Julia packages in the ecosystem, `Gungnir` is **not** a Julia package — it runs in a Python environment and has no Julia API. It sits at the bottom of the dependency hierarchy: Gungnir → Sleipnir → Muninn/Huginn → ODINN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'Gungnir` is the only package in the ODINN ecosystem writen and executed in Python. It sits at the bottom of the dependency hierarchy: Gungnir → Sleipnir → Muninn/Huginn → ODINN.
```

## When do you need to run Gungnir yourself?

For many use cases, **you do not need to run Gungnir**. Pre-built preprocessed datasets for a selection of glaciers can be downloaded automatically when you call `initialize_glaciers()` from `Sleipnir`. Gungnir is only required when:

  - You want to simulate a **glacier not covered** by the existing pre-built datasets.
  - You want to switch or customize the **climate data source** (e.g. use ERA5 daily instead of W5E5, or add a new atmospheric variable).
  - You want to use **higher-resolution or updated DEMs** rather than the OGGM defaults.
  - You are setting up a **new computing environment** where the pre-built files are unavailable and cannot be auto-downloaded.

## Installation and setup

Clone the repository and create the conda environment using the provided `environment.yml`:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate oggm_env_gungnir
```

Alternatively, use the `Makefile` to create the environment and register the Jupyter kernel in one step:

```bash
make env
```

> If you only need the `gungnir` Python module (without the full notebook environment):

Reviewer 2: To make it clear that the lines below are not needed when you simply run `conda env create...` and `conda activate...`
```suggestion
Alternatively, if you just want to install the `gungnir` module, you can clone this repository and do:
```

```bash
pip install gungnir
# or in developer mode:

> pip install -e gungnir

Reviewer: comment one of this, many people just copy paste code XD

> pip install -e gungnir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# pip install -e gungnir
```

W5E5 data (the default) does not require an API key and is recommended for most use cases.

## Climate data sources

| Source             | Temporal resolution                   | Variables                                        | Notes                                                   |
|:------------------ |:------------------------------------- |:------------------------------------------------ |:------------------------------------------------------- |
| **W5E5** (default) | Daily                                 | temp, prcp                                       | No API key required; simpler setup                      |
| **ERA5**           | Monthly (default) or daily (optional) | temp, prcp, gradient, fal, slhf, sshf, ssrd, str | Requires CDS API key; richer variable set for ML models |

ERA5 is needed when using `MassBalanceMachine.jl` neural network models, which rely on additional atmospheric variables (shortwave radiation `ssrd`, surface fluxes, etc.).

## Running the preprocessing pipeline

Create a text file listing the RGI IDs of the glaciers to preprocess (one per line, `#` comments allowed):

```
# European Alps

> RGI60-11.00897
> RGI60-11.01450

Reviewer 2: We expect ";" at the end of each line that declares a glacier
```suggestion
RGI60-11.00897;
RGI60-11.01450;
```

```

Then run:

```bash
conda activate oggm_env_gungnir
python gungnir/gungnir/preprocessing.py glaciers.txt
```

By default, data is written to `~/.ODINN/ODINN_prepro`. You can provide an explicit output directory as a second argument:

```bash
python gungnir/gungnir/preprocessing.py glaciers.txt /path/to/output
```

> After running, `Sleipnir.initialize_glaciers(rgi_ids, params)` will detect and load the generated files automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After running, `Sleipnir.initialize_glaciers(rgi_ids, params)` will detect and load the generated files automatically.
This function assumes that the preprocessed data are in `~/.ODINN/ODINN_prepro`.
```

  - `climate_historical_daily_W5E5.nc` — daily W5E5 climate forcing (temp, prcp) near the glacier centroid.
  - `climate_historical_monthly_ERA5.nc` or `climate_historical_daily_ERA5.nc` — ERA5 climate forcing at monthly or daily resolution depending on the mode used during preprocessing (see [Climate data sources](#climate-data-sources)).

On the Julia side, `Sleipnir.initialize_glaciers()` reads `rgi_paths.json` to locate each glacier, loads the NetCDF files as `RasterStack` objects via `Rasters.jl`, builds `Glacier2D` structs with a `Climate2D` attached, and downscales the climate time series to the glacier grid via `downscale_2D_climate!()`.

## How to add a new climate source or atmospheric variable

Climate retrieval is wired directly into the preprocessing loop in `gungnir/gungnir/preprocessing.py` — there is no plugin registry. The existing sources are the template: W5E5 via `process_w5e5_data` (from MBsandbox), and ERA5 via `ensure_era5_file_for_gdir` in `gungnir/gungnir/era5_climate.py`.

>  1. Add a downloader/processor that writes a per-glacier NetCDF file, following the ERA5 pattern in `era5_climate.py`.

Reviewer 2: To make the distinction between adding a climate source and adding a new atmospheric variable
```suggestion
 1. To add a new climate source, create a downloader/processor that writes a per-glacier NetCDF file, following the ERA5 pattern in `era5_climate.py`.
```
